# BPMN
**The Process**
For this project, I chose to use BPMN to model the estate planning process at a law firm where I worked the past two summers. BPMN stands for business process model and notation and is used to improve processes and extract value from them. The law firm I worked at handled estate planning, estate administration, guardianship, and business law. Estate administration involves handling a client’s family members who passed away without a will, while guardianship has to do with incapacitation. Business law concerns the creation of LLCs and ensuring that businesses follow all licensing rules when it comes to managers and agents. Estate planning involves making a will or a trust and is the type of case that receives the most clients and the most profit, which is why I chose to focus on it.

To start, the process is made up of the client, the client care coordinator, an attorney, a legal intern, and a legal assistant. The process begins when a prospective client calls the law firm and asks to set up an appointment for estate planning, which the client care coordinator schedules. Once the appointment is scheduled, the client is sent a client worksheet to be filled out before the meeting, which the attorney will review before meeting the clients. During the introductory meeting, the client meets with an attorney who will explain the differences between a will and a trust. If a client chooses to hire the attorney, then the meeting will become a design meeting, and afterwards the attorney will begin drafting the client’s documents. However, if the client chooses not to move forward, then the process ends. A simple will includes standard documents, such as HIPAA, Financial Power of Attorney, and Beneficiaries, among other documents. On the other hand, a trust includes an asset spreadsheet and the connection to the client’s bank accounts in addition to what the simple will offers. Most aspects are the same between the two plans, but if a client has children that requires a guardianship document in case of incapacitation. The client will arrive in person to sign their documents in the presence of two witnesses, unless they require an additional design meeting, in which they will sign later. Once the client signs, the Legal Intern will scan the binder and hand it over to the Legal Assistant to contact the client regarding delivery. Typically, we would wait two weeks for a client to respond before contacting them again. The process ends with the client receiving their binder. 


For this project, I chose to use BPMN to model the estate planning process at a law firm where I worked the past two summers. BPMN stands for business process model and notation and is used to improve processes and extract value from them. The law firm I worked at handled estate planning, estate administration, guardianship, and business law. Estate administration involves handling a client’s family members who passed away without a will, while guardianship has to do with incapacitation. Business law concerns the creation of LLCs and ensuring that businesses follow all licensing rules when it comes to managers and agents. Estate planning involves making a will or a trust and is the type of case that receives the most clients and the most profit, which is why I chose to focus on it.

To start, the process is made up of the client, the client care coordinator, an attorney, a legal intern, and a legal assistant. The process begins when a prospective client calls the law firm and asks to set up an appointment for estate planning, which the client care coordinator schedules. Once the appointment is scheduled, the client is sent a client worksheet to be filled out before the meeting, which the attorney will review before meeting the clients. During the introductory meeting, the client meets with an attorney who will explain the differences between a will and a trust. If a client chooses to hire the attorney, then the meeting will become a design meeting, and afterwards the attorney will begin drafting the client’s documents. However, if the client chooses not to move forward, then the process ends. A simple will includes standard documents, such as HIPAA, Financial Power of Attorney, and Beneficiaries, among other documents. On the other hand, a trust includes an asset spreadsheet and the connection to the client’s bank accounts in addition to what the simple will offers. Most aspects are the same between the two plans, but if a client has children who require a guardianship document in case of incapacitation. The client will arrive in person to sign their documents in the presence of two witnesses, unless they require an additional design meeting, in which they will sign later. Once the client signs, the Legal Intern will scan the binder and hand it over to the Legal Assistant to contact the client regarding delivery. Typically, we would wait two weeks for a client to respond before contacting them again. The process ends with the client receiving their binder. 


**The Current State - What's Inefficient**
A bottleneck that I noticed in my BPMN model would be the gateway label “Worksheet completed?” as it’s encouraged for clients to fill out the worksheet for the attorney to get to know them better. However, many clients don’t fill it out, which means the attorney spends time on administrative work rather than designing an estate plan, which would be a billable expense. Another bottleneck that I noticed would be the “Wait 2 weeks” before recontacting the client, as the binders will continue to stack up in the Legal Assistant’s office, and the process will be further delayed. 

Another part of the inefficient model would be redundant steps, such as “Additional design meeting needed?” as that could be absorbed into “Design estate plan” as that is what that meeting would entail. Additionally, the tasks of “Contact client to arrange binder delivery” and “send email” could be combined into one to reduce the redundancy of this step. Further, there could be a task labeled “Give binder to Legal Intern” to bridge the gap between “Additional design meeting needed” and “Mark signature/initial tabs” as the viewer could be confused at that point in the process. 


**What the BPMN Analysis Revealed**
Bottlenecks and role overload were made visible through analyzing my model, as the attorney's lane handles the majority of the process. Even though the attorney’s lane is crowded, I don’t think that the process could be done any other way, as they’re the ones licensed to draft legal documents. The “client has children?” gateway could present issues, as there’s no formal check listed in the model if the attorney were to forget that step, which rarely happens. 

Another aspect of my model that I discovered afterwards would be the waiting time between each step, as the process can take up to a few months, since there are many steps and various people are involved. For example, the reconnect loop could mean that the binder is sitting in the office waiting for the client to respond to an email, which could be shortened with a quick phone call. Another example would be the “hold additional design meeting” as the model reads that the client restarts the entire process, rather than having an additional meeting, as the name would suggest. 


**Recommendations**
One project improvement could be implementing the automation of the new client worksheet rather than having the Client Care Coordinator send the worksheet individually to every client. This would cut down on the amount of time spent by the coordinator doing this and would give the clients more time to work on the worksheet before the meeting. Another project improvement would be to automate emails for binder delivery notifications, allowing the Legal Assistant to focus on other tasks. 
